Once upon a midnight dreary, while I pondered weak and weary
Over many a quaint and curious volume of forgotten lore.
While I nodded nearly napping, suddenly there came a tapping
As of someone gently rapping, rapping at my chamber door.
"'Tis some visitor", I muttered. "Tapping at my chamber door. Only this, and nothing more."

Aw distinctly I remember it was in the bleak december,
And each seperate dying ember wraught its ghost upon the floor.
Eagerly I wished the morrow, vaily I had saught to borrow,
From my books surcease of sorrow, sorrow for the lost lenore.
For the rare and radiant maiden, whom the angels name lenore, nameless here forever more.

And the silken sad uncertain rustling of each purple curtain,
Thrilled me filled me with fantastic terrors never felt before.
So that now to steal the beating of my heart I stood repeating 
"'Tis some visitor entreating entrance at my chamber door
some late visitor entreating entrance at my chamber door. This it is and nothing more."

Presently my sould grew stronger hesitating then no longer
"Sir," said I. "Or madam surely your forgiveness I implore.
But the fact is I was napping when so faintly you came tapping
and so faintly you came rapping, rapping at my chamber door,
That I scarce was sure I heard you." Here I opened wide the door. Darkness there and nothing more.

Deep into that darkness peering. Long I stood there wondering fearing
Doubting dreaming dreams no mortal ever dared to dream before.
But the silence was unbroken and the darkness gave no token
And the only word there spoken was the wispered word, "Lenore."
This I whispered and and echo murmured back the word, "Lenore." Merely this and nothing more.

Back into my chamber turning, all my soul within me burning
soon I heard a tapping somewhat louder than before.
"Surely," said I "Surely that is something at my window lattice
Let me see then what there at is and this mytery explore.
Let my heart be still a minute and this mystery explore. Tis the wind and nothing more."

Open here I flung the shutter then with many a flirt and flutter
In there stepped a stately raven of the saintly days of yore. 
Not the least obiescience made he. Not a moment stopped or stayed he
but with mein of lord or lady perched upon my chamber door.
Perched upon a bust of Pallace just above my chamber door. Perched and sat and nothing more.