The Midband Upconverter is an SRA found in the Forward and Aft Antenna Interface Unit (AIU) Weapons Replaceable Assemblies (WRA).  The purpose of the MBUC is to take a lowband input signal from an antenna, filter and upconvert the signal to the midband range, and then output the signal for further processing.
The MBUC SRA consists of three NGES source controlled Integrated Microwave Assemblies (IMA) and one attenuator mounted on a heat sink chassis.  These are shown in Figure.
Four RF cable assemblies and a power/signal cable assembly are also mounted on the heat sink chassis.
The MBUC SRA is a multiple input single output  assembly that provides: 
Input selection of the antennas or BIT/Cal.
Variable RF attenuation.
RF band selection over the input frequency range.
Up-conversion of the LB signals into the MB frequency range.
There are three Midband Upconverters in the Forward Antenna Interface Unit (AIU) Weapons Replaceable Assembly (WRA) and three in the Aft AIU WRA.  Two low-loss, phase-matched cables connect each forward-mounted LB Antenna Array (Antenna Units (AU)11/12) to two MBUC boards in the Forward AIU (WRA-4).  A Long Baseline Interferometer (LBI) Blade Antenna (AU-9) is cabled to the third MB Upconverter board in WRA-4.  Each MB Upconverter includes an ESM Built-In Test/Calibration (BIT/Cal) signal to test and calibrate the LB path.  A digitally controlled switch is used to select the desired input.  The signal can then be attenuated.  A digitally controlled variable attenuator is used to select between three attenuation levels (0/15/30 dB).  The signal is then filtered into one of four subbands.  A digitally controlled preselector is used to select between the four lowband frequency subbands.  The signal is then upconverted using a frequency upconverter to shift the LB signal up, by the amount of the frequency at the Local Oscillator input, to the midband (MB).  An identical arrangement is available from the Aft Quadrant Arrays (AU13/14) and LBI Blade Antenna (AU10) to the Aft AIU (WRA-5).  The up-converted signals are then switched into HB Preselector boards for processing.
The verification of the testing requirements for this UUT to be deemed Ready for Issue (RFI), was performed during the development and review of the Midband Upconverter TRD  The test strategy identified in this report implements all test requirements identified by the above TRD.  Any deviations from these test requirements will be identified in the Engineering Notes (See Section ) section of this document.
All tests implemented via this test strategy will be parametric tests.  Parametric tests can be used to satisfy all test requirements and meet ambiguity group requirements.
The UUT is made of four electronic components—two Integrated Microwave Assemblies (IMAs), one Bandpass Filter, and one interchangeable Attenuator.  All possible failure modes identified in the Midband Upconverter TRD (Doc) will be tested for, providing for 100% fault detection.  The ambiguity group requirements specified in MIL-PRF-32070A will be satisfied (See Table).
The Network Analyzer (PNA) and Test Program Hardware (TPH) or Panel Interface Device (PID) design are the primary contributors to the efficiency of the Test Program (TP).  
The PNA with necessary installed options is designed to complete all measurements that require frequency sweeps with proper frequency resolution very quickly and with low uncertainty.  Subject matter experts that have been consulted estimate that the PNA will perform frequency related tests at least one order of magnitude quicker than the CASS Family of Testers.
An RF relay network has been designed into the PID to minimize the number of connects and disconnects required to be performed by the operator.  This allows for fast and repeatable measurements across the four inputs and one output of the UUT.  Additionally, where possible, the testing sequence has been biased to test for the most probable failure modes first.  Table  provides the runtime estimates related to this OTPS.
The simplest and most maintainable design concept for the PID RF Interfaces would use RF cables in the PID to connect the RF I/O connectors on the UUT to RF I/O connectors on the front panel of the PID.  This design would require significant operator interaction as cables from the ATE would need to be moved in between tests.  This would significantly increase ETE runtime as well as decrease repeatability.  Therefore, a design including RF relays was conceived for the PID RF interfaces.
The design for the PID RF interfaces uses one SP4T RF relay to accommodate the MBUC’s RF I/O connections to the ATE.  As is shown in Section , there is additional hardware in the PID to accommodate another UUT, the Highband Preselector, however only components in the PID relating to MBUC testing will be shown in most of the figures of this document (See Figure ).  With the RF relay, the PID is more complex and therefore more difficult to maintain.  However, the use of an RF relay eliminates operator interaction during ETE testing.  Additionally, the RF relay has a low repeatability uncertainty specification.  So using this design decreases ETE runtime and increases repeatability.
Vector Mixer Converter measurement techniques necessitate additional hardware being incorporated into the PID. As shown in Figure , additional hardware will include: an RF power amplifier, an RF power divider, a reference mixer/filter, and a calibration mixer/filter. These will be included in the PID to be used for UUT measurement and calibration procedures.
This section shall address the testing concepts and techniques employed to test each UUT function and mode of operation.  For an overview of the functional test sequence see Section.
The testing of the MBUC UUT relies heavily on the use of a Vector Network Analyzer (PNA Model N5224A).  The PNA will be used for all tests involving RF measurements.  General reference information on the PNA can be found in Section. Planned method for operating the PNA can be found in Section 13.
All RF measurements on the UUT will utilize the VMC measurement technique. This technique provides a way to make the absolute phase measurements required by phase tracking tests. The VMC measurement technique is documented in the reference literature (see Section). Additionally, some key features of this technique are addressed in Section 13.